{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 P. P. mk 6\
\
This version incorporates a second order ART that watches the output of the first order ART. It also adds more interval features (looking at the intervals up and down differently). It can also listen to a MIDI file, provide a visual print out of what it's thinking, and then improvise "in the same style".\
\
However it still wanders around willy-nilly (to our ears).\
\
----\
\
Piano Player mk 3\
\
Recoded the importance weighting, and ignored the "recency" idea. This later seems to be covered by the measure of residual when several ARTs are nested together. This version uses 2 levels of ARTs watching the same feature vector (one with a high vigilance, one with a wide/low vigilance). Thus inputs try to satisfy both at once, causing more cohesive explorations of the musical space.\
\
Try the "give it C and go" test (open all the gates and put in 60).\
\
----\
\
Piano Player mk 2\
\
Revisions in this agent:\
	recency\
	import weighting\
	tradeoff between resonance & residual\
	tweaks to coefficients/parameters, now better understood\
\
Demo: in max use one of the diatonic sets and input it 5 or 6 times. Then set all the g-gates to let data through and give it the next note it wants (or any of the diatonic notes) and let it go!\
\
Setting the decay rate longer (0.9) vs shorter (0.2): shorter causes fewer, more distinctive categories. This seems to work well for the "others" STM. Setting it higher causes more sequential relationships between the categories (i.e. A leads to B to C almost every time) and requires more categories to be created to reflect subtle sequential differences. The shorter version for pitch & interval causes short motivic fragments and alternating pairs of notes (i.e. really slow trills). Longer causes more lines and patterns (around 6 at 0.8).\
\
\
PianoPlayer mk 1\
\
This reinforcement learning agent observes inputs, categorizes these inputs, and predicts maximally rewarding subsequent inputs. This version looks at pitch class and interval class\
\
Run the max patch and xCode project. In the max patch: click one of the message boxes or the big bang towards the bottom-left. Then swith the g-gate to on (if it's off) and enter a number in the lower-most left box (typically the number shown in the right-middle most number box: the next most valuable input). Then watch it go!\
\
(the malloc errors in the Xcode project are ignorable\'96it's freeing a resource that was not assigned.)\
\
This version predicts future inputs by multiplying the summed resonance for each prediction with the resultant learning residual. The result is a very steady and uniform exploration of the feature space, which is fairly uninteresting after 30 seconds or so. \
\
The next step is to give it some way to vary its rate of progress, incorporating ideas of freshness vs. overplayed and a meta boredom factor that prompts for more spontaneous leaps.}